Let me go back. Are you all right? That's all. So we discussed how speech sounds are expressed, how they are formed with the different vibrations and movements of the human body. Or how to analyze the acoustic properties of sound? Thus, due to different recent movements, some sound waves are produced. What do you want to do? You have to get a soundtrack. You need to capture these sounds, they need to do TERM4__, and then you need to do whatever you want to do. Then different kinds of procedures should be done. You'll have to go through the same process and we'll see some changes. And during the whole process, it will be decided how the process should be done. Or audio sound? And then what will happen? Or after all the process, if you want to hear the voice again, say that I wanted to make the voice more melodic, I wanted to increase the voice, I wanted to add some kind of audio processing and then I wanted to hear it again. What am I supposed to do? If you get the TERM4__d signal, you will convert it back into analog. You turn it back into sound waves, you play it, and we hear it this way? How do you hear that? It depends on the size of your ear, it depends on the process of your ear. And how everyone's voice is understood is also relative. For you, maybe DJ music playing in a club. Surprisingly, I can say, because of my age, I can say, let's go home, so it's all very relative, or dependent, because our body shapes are different, we understand things, our experiences are different, their behavior is different. So depending on everything, the sound is also perceptible. So when we speak, the same words can be different, the way of speaking can be different, not only the meaning but only the acoustic characteristics can be automatic, so we will discuss very briefly. But TERM3__ is a branch of TERM3__ that practices how speech sounds are so that we can process through the human Auditory system. And they focus on linguistic and physical properties. Any language signals we know? And then how do we understand different forms and different types of words? So how the speed changes, how the sound changes, how the frequency changes, it all comes down to it. I'm going to tell you something. So the ear plug design, the hearing aid design or the design of your headphones. They are all. .. So when you turn from capture to processing and play again, this is a whole field that you want to see. Computer scientist, signal processor, term 5 expert, we mainly focus on the middle part, which is my term 2. So how do we process it? Once the data is captured, how do we process it? You know what? Thus, it has some basic properties in terms of process. You know what? What are the basic properties? The frequency. How do you buy them? I'm going to tell you something. How long is it? You know what? And then I'll discuss it in detail in a little while. Frequency is what? Well, I have to go halfway. Well, things don't change for us. Okay, just hold on. I don't know the Lahi class code. Can you pin in the chat? Yes, ma'am. You can ping me. Yes, ma'am. Yes, ma'am. I'm sorry, I think I shared the last explanation. That's all right. And now she's moving on. Yes, ma'am. - Thank you. - Thank you. Thank you for appreciating that. That's all right. So when we talk about frequency, we talk about how we capture audio? Let me go upstairs. I'm sorry about that. A few slides. For the book. That's all right. How do you catch the sonic latas? Digitally licensed? You catch them, and then you? How is their process started? Sampling and verification. Or are there two processes? How do we take samples and quantize? For example, there are some sounds that you can record and keep an active eye on. I'm at a very basic level. Now I've gone to the very basic level. I don't work there. What is actually a continuous signal coming and at a certain speed, we are actually capturing when the signal is coming at a certain time. You pick up the signal. Do you pick up the signal? This is an analog signal. You are now transforming it into an independent signal. So every time, what's the audio, what's the sound level? When I say "sound level", what does it mean? What is the term for that amount? So, that's called sampling? So, if it converts to real time, then it converts the real-time variable signal to a descriptive time signal, which contains real numbers. And what is your quantization? When we quantize, they change the real numbers we have. With some different values now these are both individual quantization for sampling you decide on which interval? Do you want to show a signal? One thing I want to know is, do we need a sample for a continuous signal? Can someone tell me if we need a sample for a continuous interval? Look, you can work with limited data and what you're doing is you have to quantize it. Excuse me, do you want to do that signal to the terminal? So you can do this, there's an analog signal. But you have samples, every time there's some audio signal. So you have to capture the event of that time. Now if you want to catch anything else. This means that we didn't have to work on continuous stages. We have to work some time differently. So time difference you can choose. You can choose. How long do you want to keep the difference? If you want to capture audio. If you want to capture the value of every microsecond, millisecond, nanosecond or sound, you can do it. So it depends on whether to draw the bed samples or not. Give me a second, there's a problem. Oh, yeah, yeah. But the speed of sampling is the number of samples per second that you collect to create a waveform. And if you're prepared, if you've made a big difference, say you're getting a value in every millisecond. If you capture an audio value in every millisecond, if you capture an audio value in every millisecond, if you capture an audio value in every nanosecond, if you capture an audio value in every nanosecond, if you take a time frame of one to two nanoseconds, you will lose some information. Even now you have a shortage of information between 1 and 2 nanos, but when you lead a millisecond compared to another millisecond, then the amount of information you lack is significantly higher. What 's going on? Compare it with your visual experience. What 's going on? Do you have a TV or a screen? When you watch TV, will someone tell me? So there's a 4K resolution TV. High definition television. Khare High Definition TV. That'll be two thousand. So it will be HD. Or what happens in all things? Or what happens in all things? Compare the TV you have to the TV you have or the TV you had 10 years ago. What are you doing? So what was going on in the East was a pixel opening. So what are we doing? Take a high-resolution photo. What are we doing to represent pixels, we are using more information, if we are using very little information to represent pixels. So how much detailed information can I collect? If you're in a TV showroom then Sonichi's showroom is somewhere in the city. What if you were in that showroom and just watching TV? You have the highest-resolution television and you have the lowest-resolution television. Even if a drop of water falls as you can see. You can see what is going on in the water particles. What if you watch Eastern TV? Eastern CRT TV is coming. After that, small-scale television, low-resolution television. There's no such thing as pixel clarity. Now bring this example on audio. Something that's playing on your mobile, normal mobile phones, and playing in the theater. Or you have a very fancy sound system where every drop falls. Can you hear me? Every little change in the audio soundtrack, produced by R Rahman. If you are listening to that music on the very normal mobile phone then you are listening to that music on a. .. Very sophisticated speakers and all. You'll hear a difference in each node, there is a difference in each node. But perhaps the problem is due to the sample taking certificate or the pixels in the system. Look, there are pixels in the images. Oh, yeah, yeah. Is the speed of sampling different? The sampling rate is very high. What 's going on? So you're capturing the difference in more detail. What 's going on? But you also need to understand that. .. But this is an example of the rate of sampling. The one you see on the left is your analogue lat and its digital result. Now, if you get the first figure, then you will see the first digital result. You will get mid-party rest. So you won't be able to hear the audio just as smoothly. So if you get to the very skin of the figure, then you will get a very detailed audio compared to the first figure. There are many more subtleties among you. Now to be a smooth switch, to be a smooth audio signal, what do you need? You need to hear the voice. It is necessary to compare what your ears hear, what your ears understand. Or signalling a bug. And the higher it is, the higher. I'm sorry about that. If you lack proof of sampling, there will be more errors in reconstruction. The less proof of sampling there is, the less there will be, because you are taking a sample in the lack of proof. If you capture small values, there may be more errors in reconstruction. More high. Because there are good patterns, good signals that you can't capture. Yes, I did. What are you holding? The same interval. That's all right. So the question is, do you draw the same interval? Is there proof of sampling? Why don't you change it? Does anyone know about it? Because the demodulation process will be simplified. When the sampling rate is stable, the demodulation process is also simple. The process of demodulation is to re-create the signal. The demodulation process is easy to re-create. When the sample rate is fixed, you say something. You don't know anything. But the issue is right. So he says, if you're a. .. Audio flow where there is no long-term audio there you can take a less rapid sample when you can take a more detailed audio sample at a higher speed. Well, you can't do that, but the way to deal with it is to filter it. You capture it, you filter it, and when you capture it, you actually see it. Theoretically speaking, you can also sample it at different speeds, but when you recreate it and process it of any kind, you need to know that it is part of the signal or what the sample rate is during the day. It is also possible, when we see any sentence or when we sing a song or any kind of audio signal that is happening, the audio flow is not only quiet, but when we are talking, maybe the beginning of the class is very slow, slow. But then in the middle, I have grown, my speed has grown. And then, towards the end of the class, I slow down again. When you sing a song, again, I'll go back to ARK. Merciful, it will be, and then it will be higher and then it will be lower. So you can capture all those types. It is possible, but theoretically not limited. But then. . Did you get any experience? It is a continuous, continuous pattern-shaped perception. If you take a sample at different stages, what is the result? Or you should know very specifically, there are time zones when there is a long period of silence. But you have to analyze those frequencies, you have to analyze term 1 and you have to shut it down. Filter and filter there is no audio in that signal that is filter out and or process is uploaded but we are capturing during the capture when we do not know what type of sounds are so then we catch the data solving the sample rate is OK so what need depends on what use case is are you taking the sample? You can test it in different ways. For example, when we talk about walkie-talkies, wireless intercoms, microphones, phones and everything else, we test them at 8 Hz. Modern equipment, 16 Hz. What 's going on? Audio CD or MPEG audio of low quality, 22. 05. But audio CDs when you have high-quality MPEG-1 audio or other MP3 audio, other types of audio that are high-quality, then you increase them. And then you can increase it even more. You can do it in high definition. 48 kHz, high definition audio, 96 kHz? So it depends on how we use it, what do we process it for? And depending on that they change, so, the summary related also, going back and sometimes we are also summary? You do, often you have compressed, when you transfer a file on social media, WhatsApp or e-mail or similar things, you have a large audio file. If we transfer they give us what option to compress we want to send them in the same size small size medium size Google gives us or type of option so it compresses if we say that I want to text in that small size then audio signal compresses then compresses how to compress this is a way this is a way we can help to compress or sample also helps me for information and then we reorganize it is what I say will help to take a sample so if my audio comes up at about 20 Hz to 44 Hz. 20 Hz to, I think, 2 kHz, 20 kHz. That's what people hear. So usually, when we take some samples. .. In order for human canals to be easily obtained, we take a sample of 40, 000. We take samples up to 40 kHz. Shall we take a sample of 40 kHz? Because you have a Newquist theorem. What does the Newquist theorem say? Now, if we accurately represent the signal, the sampling rate will be at least twice as frequent as the most present in the signal. We can hear it at 20 kHz. So if there's more than that in the signal, we can't do it. So, if we can't hear it, we'll make it the highest point and we'll double-test it. However, up to 20 Hz to 20 kHz, for sampling, the minimum sample we normally use for our purposes is 40 kHz. For phones and all other things, we process them in low quality due to bandwidth and processing and all those things due to a good problem. Because you're constantly broadcasting, because of that process, we do it. And then you can relate to the quality of audio heard on a normal phone when you can listen to music on any kind of thing. That is, the second issue in terms of sampling is that in terms of quantization, you need to capture or sample data. Now how do you represent or encode data? There are good ways to do this. How many pixels? What room are you using for coding? If you use more space or pixel values, there will be a lot of changes that will be encoded. Because if you're only using one byte, you won't be able to make big changes on a microscopic level. Encode them? So there will be quantization accordingly. A lot of pixels, a lot of groups will get what will happen, will happen at a very subtle level, even at the macro level but if you have more space, then you can encode very, very small ups and downs, very unique, very small ups and downs in the audio and hear what is going on. You know what? But there are two different kinds of things, sampling and quantization, which you need to keep in mind. You know what? But when we talk about sampling and quantization, we come up with something else. You know what? What do you mean? There's an acoustic lattice height, right? So they are measured in decibels and it is a logarithmic scale in which we basically measure the sound pressure relative to the reference value. Reference value is usually the reference value of the peace we have heard. For peace Amplitude are considered zero. But if it's quiet, then the reference value will be zero for us. This is the first time I've seen this. Pressure is, so to speak, basic pressure 1 is considered. We are dealing with a log scale, so the base pressure is considered 1. You have TERM1__, you work on a log scale. So the value of TERM1__, TERM1__ increases 1. So there's only one. So is there a log 1? No one logs in. So, a value log 1 is increasing. But it's very important. There is much more important than that. They don't just increase in value. And when you look at the latches, you see the latches. So, there is a lack of amplifier on the side of the skin, but the figure on the top side shows a high _TERM1__. The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with the opinion of the Standing Committee on Plants, Animals and Food. Now, there is another thing, it is __ TERM1__. President. - Mr President, I would like to express my appreciation to the President of the United States of America and to the President of the United States of America. We say voice control comes in. You know what? So you have a voice, you have a term, you have a voice. You know what? So the volume is we can control from there. Amplitude versus audio. What's the difference between TERM1__ and audio? - No, I did not. And a loud voice. What's that sound? Voice directly __ TERM1__ is square certified. Voice directly __ TERM1__ is square certified. What do you think? So and what they are also representative of they somehow measure its frequency also plays a role voice frequency also plays a role when you are capturing voice when there is a combination Amplitude and frequency as a result there is a voice voice so you can understand the intensity of the voice or how the voice is referred to and I initially said voice voice voice is different for different people it can be different for me so it can be different not only depends on physical characteristics but also how we can bring meaning so that you can measure it but also to them. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . So, the building pressure, the sound, the causing sound, the building pressure in the environment. The reference values we have are taken into account. So doubling the intensity of the sound will increase a little more than three dB, but a hundred times more sound will be a decibel. 20 decibels does not mean that the sound is 20 times higher but it means 100 times higher. But accordingly, the value of the decibel is related to 60 dB or the unit is related to it. For example, if you only have values, first of all, so, I can't see it, sorry. If you're confused, it's 20 to 30 decibels. If you have a quiet room, about 40. If you've got a little bit of money, about 50. Dishwasher, 60. Vacuum dry cleaner, 70. And if you have a car stereo or a jackhammer or a metal concert, the values they will build are very, very high. So it goes up to 150 decibels. So 100 times more noise reaches 20 decibels. Imagine what 150 decibels means. How many times do you have to face it? Or have you noticed that people who work in metal concerts have early hearing problems? I don't know. I don't know. I'm just surprised they do it now so they have it. They have it. But you need those tools, but if there are, I don't know. How do you feel about that energy? Yes, I am sure that this is a major revision of how we can actually save the people who work here. Your sports, sports injuries and sports medicine is a huge field. I am sure that this sector will also be of significant interest in improving the health of musicians and performers. Very, very. There's a select audience but they're there so it's your decibel and different decibel values have an effect. What is the length of the audio? It's been a long time. Some proof of the length of time, the length of time? So the length of the audio indicates the length of the audio signal. But these are usually counted among the normal units of time. You'll have seconds, length, minutes, hours. It's easy to measure. But once again, according to the length, what is the unit? How much do you actually measure your sample take rate? Or it will depend on it. So the length is relative. And then it is phonetic in a good language. So when we say phonetic in a good language, then this is possible. So if a word is long, there are more dishes and spices, then it takes more time to be spoken. What 's going on? If a word is long or short, it takes less time to get high. Ideally? In a specific language, if you speak seven times. That's right. She speaks a nice language. Not for everyone, but for a good language. For example, if you speak English, then every sound in the sky is not heard in the same way. For example, do you have examples of Amitabh Bachchan films? Amitabh Bachchan says, does anyone remember or is it too old for you? There's a movie, the nose is red. Has anyone seen it? Is there a law? So the dialogue has begun. So he says that English is a very funny language. WYING TIME PAT PUT VAR BEAUTY Goes from Right G O Go TO DO DO Right So It's O D to OK D to D to D to D is But De U Sage O U The Jobs You Don't Constant This Hindi O Up So He Will Be Brought There But He Will Be Or They Will Be Right But English Not For Netic Long Right Buy This Is Not Constant. The composition of words also determines the manner in which those words are spoken. What 's going on? But that's one thing. The second thing is the speed of a word. Or sentence, when we speak it, then it is not stable. When I am angry or when I am very happy, then I speak very quickly. But when I try to communicate with someone or anger comes, only anger comes, no. In addition, sometimes the speech rate is also unstable at the end of a sentence and is slower and depends on your behavior and other things, so the length of the audio cannot be said to be the length of the audio, if it is sampled at a given speed, it will only represent it. What 's going on? So there are good subjects because we are also capturing human audio. Now let me go back. So, we talked about it recently. The frequency measurement means how many times we capture your sample rate related so high frequency high pitched sound means and low frequency low pitched sound means give me high frequency sound and low frequency sound an example. It's a screaming sound. A screaming sound? So a few weeks ago I could hear the voice of my office door. What the hell was going on? When I opened or closed the door, two pieces of metal collided with each other. I heard a very troubling voice. What 's going on? Shake it off. But these are your high frequency sounds. What about low-frequency sounds? You know what? It's very messy, Drum. So the number of ups and downs that are taking place or the decrease of the sound latitude, if it is a flat sound, will reduce the ups and downs. Take an example of a mag or bass guitar, less male voice, none of which will be yours. The lack of frequency and if we take an example of this, then of course your lack of frequency is your high frequency, i. e. as such a sound or as a combination of all of them, and how does it result? Now, when you get all this, you get TERM1__, sorry, you get frequency, you get sample rate on which they are captured. You know what? And all together, your last audio signal you will get the last audio signal. You know what? So when we capture audio signals, we capture those audio signals in the time domain. We've seen the eastern signal. You know what? But when we're processing it, now take a look at that audio signal. You have TERM1__. But what is it? You know what? I have some properties related to TERM1__. Even a little bottle too. You can do any kind of work. You can only aim at a person's mood and use some evidence. But you also need frequency to do more than that. It's not just audio, it doesn't help. We were talking about work. ASR, speaker identification, or any kind of work for which you want to become a model. Just use the speaker ID. It's not going to work? Or speech recognition or speaker recognition, it will not work. So what do we do that we convert into frequency domains and we also work with frequency? Because it gives you a lot of information and you too. .. Yes, this allows you to get a lot of information and you can also connect them to phone names. How do you produce related other properties? We make an audio cassette. While we are talking about a topic, a good quality can be related to it. You know what? When we process it in frequency domains, it goes back. You know what? Hi, ma'am. What's going on? Okay, but when there's a signal in the time zone, then the x axis shows your time and the y axis shows your time. This is the first time I've heard of this. But this is an example of different frequencies of science waves. When you convert it into a frequency domain, you get that information. But when we talk about frequency domain, then your x-axis frequency will be, and y-axis half. Do we have any information available? Now, what we can do is we can use this term. We only have frequency and TERM1__ information, frequency domain, now there are types of operations on it. Has anyone operated in the frequency domain? In the images we made. In the picture? That's all right. What kind of operation? Prashik Mem, DFT, Discrete Fourier Transform. And then we can apply low pass filter, high pass filter. You can do low pass filtering, high pass filtering such things. So if you have the examples I have already mentioned, if you have a long period of calm, if you have a long period of calm, you know that there is a lack, I can filter through the lack or any kind of filtering to remove the frequency. I am not here, if there is some confused sound, which is some cold confusion, some high frequency confusion, I don't think we can do different types of filtering operations on the signal so that anything else can be done. Dust removal can be done. What else? So there are only a few operations that you can do on the basic level of frequency information. You know what? But when we analyze audio signals, there are other things as well. You have a speed that you can pull out frequently. We have a term. And how can we extract other properties from it and then process it for any other reasons. Will you be able to present it? So maybe I'll stop here today. So it's about 55. I'll stop here today. And then in the next class, we move on. See what that means, how do we take it and then how do we take the time zone from the speech? We only had one time domain that was 1D. And then how to prepare 2D information spectrogram? 2D Spectrogram of information and how to process it all. So let's see some of these but please go back and make a promise about the frequency Amplitude and the decibel and some of the properties and then we will process it and then we will come back and keep the class running. If there are any questions in our speech inspector's further analysis, please excuse the class code. You can see if in a minute I have no doubt that I do not. That's all right. So everyone, please join the class. Google Link, you're already there. But if someone isn't there, then Google's LaRoom link is in the class. Professor, can you share the recording with our class? Share it? Video recording in the classroom. Yeah, I'm sharing the recording. I'm sharing the recording. That's all. So, see you Monday. - Thank you. - Thank you. - Thank you. - Thank you. - Thank you. - Thank you.